# Frequent Hitter Alerts

---

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> ALARM NMR Rule

The ALARM NMR (Assay to Label Reactants in Mixtures Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) rule is introduced in the research [1].
This methodology serves as an efficient and reliable experimental approach for identifying reactive false positives in
biochemical screening assays using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). **(75 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> BMS Rule

The BMS rule, which stands for Biologically Meaningful Substructure, is an empirical process designed to enhance the
effectiveness of high-throughput screening (HTS) deck filters. The approach is detailed in the research [2]. The BMS
rule aims to identify and incorporate biologically relevant substructures into screening libraries, thereby improving
the likelihood of discovering compounds with genuine biological activity. **(176 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> Chelator Rule

The Chelator Rule is introduced in the research [3]. This rule serves as a guiding principle in the design and
utilization of chelator-based fragment libraries for the purpose of targeting metalloproteinases. Metalloproteinases
play crucial roles in various biological processes, and their dysregulation is associated with several diseases, making
them attractive therapeutic targets. **(55 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> GST/GSH FH filter

The GST/GSH FH (Glutathione S-Transferase/Glutathione Frequent Hitters) filter rule is a methodology described in the
research [4]. This rule is devised to identify small molecules that frequently interact with the glutathione
S-transferase (GST) enzyme and its glutathione (GSH) substrate. GST is a critical enzyme involved in detoxification
processes, and its interaction with GSH is essential for cellular function. **(34 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> His-tagged protein FH filter

The His-tagged protein FH (Frequent Hitters) filter rule is a method outlined in the research [5]. This rule is designed
to identify small molecules that frequently interact with proteins tagged with histidine (His-tagged proteins) in
high-throughput screening assays conducted using AlphaScreen technology. **(19 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> Luciferase inhibitor Rule

The Luciferase Inhibitor Rule is a concept presented in the research [6]. This rule aims to address challenges in
high-throughput screening (HTS) assays that use luciferase as a reporter gene. Luciferase-based assays are widely
employed in drug discovery to assess biological activity, and false-positive hits can be a significant concern. **(3
substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> NTD Rule

The NTD (Neglected Tropical Diseases) Rule is introduced in the research [7]. This rule encapsulates insights and
guidelines derived from the process of assembling screening libraries specifically tailored for drug discovery efforts
targeting neglected tropical diseases. Neglected diseases, often afflicting populations in resource-limited regions,
present unique challenges and necessitate targeted drug discovery approaches. **(105 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> PAINS Rule

The PAINS rules (Pan Assay Interference Compounds) constitute a set of substructure filters designed to exclude
interfering compounds from screening libraries. These rules aim to identify compounds that may lead to misleading
results in bioassays, thereby enhancing the accuracy and reliability of screening experiments. The research [8] provides
a comprehensive description of the development and optimization of PAINS rules, along with their application in the
exclusion of potentially false-positive compounds from screening libraries. **(480 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> Potential electrophilic Rule

The Potential Electrophilic Rule emerges as a groundbreaking paradigm, challenging conventional norms in the realm of
chemical structural alerts. Unveiled in the research [9], this rule beckons a bold departure from the commonplace,
ushering in a new era of avant-garde perspectives in toxicological assessments. **(119 substructures)**

## <i class="bi bi-caret-right-fill"></i> Lilly Medchem Rules

Lilly Medchem Rules, developed by Eli Lilly Company, represent a comprehensive set of guidelines designed to identify
and eliminate compounds that may interfere with biological assays in the drug discovery process [10]. These rules were
developed over an 18-year period and consist of 275 criteria aimed at refining screening sets and improving the
efficiency of drug development. The rules cover various aspects, including chemical reactivity (e.g., acyl halides),
potential interference with assay measurements (such as fluorescence, absorbance, or quenching), activities that may
cause damage to proteins (oxidizers, detergents), instability issues (e.g., latent aldehydes), and a lack of
druggability (compounds lacking both oxygen and nitrogen). **(273 substructure)**

## References

1. Huth JR, Mendoza R, Olejniczak ET et al. ALARM NMR:A Rapid and Robust Experimental Method To Detect Reactive False
   Positives in Biochemical Screens, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2005;127:217-224.

2. Pearce BC, Sofia MJ, Good AC et al. An Empirical Process for the Design of High-Throughput Screening Deck Filters,
   Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2006;46:1060-1068.

3. Agrawal A, Johnson SL, Jacobsen JA et al. Chelator Fragment Libraries for Targeting Metalloproteinases, ChemMedChem
   2010;5:195-199.

4. Brenke JK, Salmina ES, Ringelstetter L et al. Identification of Small-Molecule Frequent Hitters of Glutathione
   S-Transferaseâ€“Glutathione Interaction, SLAS Discovery 2016;21:596-607.

5. Schorpp K, Rothenaigner I, Salmina E et al. Identification of Small-Molecule Frequent Hitters from AlphaScreen
   High-Throughput Screens, Journal of Biomolecular Screening 2014;19:715-726.

6. Ghosh D, Koch U, Hadian K et al. Luciferase Advisor: High-Accuracy Model To Flag False Positive Hits in Luciferase
   HTS Assays, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2018;58:933-942.

7. Brenk R, Schipani A, James D et al. Lessons Learnt from Assembling Screening Libraries for Drug Discovery for
   Neglected Diseases, ChemMedChem 2008;3:435-444.

8. Baell JB, Holloway GA. New Substructure Filters for Removal of Pan Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) from
   Screening Libraries and for Their Exclusion in Bioassays, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2010;53:2719-2740.

9. Sushko I, Salmina E, Potemkin VA et al. ToxAlerts: A Web Server of Structural Alerts for Toxic Chemicals and
   Compounds with Potential Adverse Reactions, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2012;52:2310-2316.

10. Bruns RF, Watson IA. Rules for Identifying Potentially Reactive or Promiscuous Compounds, Journal of Medicinal
    Chemistry 2012;55:9763-9772.